The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sailor, by J. C. Snaith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sailor

Author: J. C. Snaith

Illustrator: W. A. Hottinger

Release Date: December 2, 2011 [EBook #38186]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SAILOR ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: "Mr. Harper was completely out of his depth." (Page
267.)]






THE SAILOR


BY

J. C. SNAITH


AUTHOR OF "ANNE FEVERSHAM," "BROKE OF COVENDEN,"
  "ARAMINTA," ETC.



ILLUSTRATED BY

W. A. HOTTINGER



THOMAS LANGTON

TORONTO

1916




COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"Mr. Harper was completely out of his depth." . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

"A nigger with rings in his ears came forward with a light."

"'I was a bit on last night,' she said with well assumed humility."

"'Mary,' he said, 'do you remember your words eleven months ago?'"




THE SAILOR



BOOK I

GESTATION

I

A large woman in a torn dress stood at the gate of a rag and bone
dealer's yard.  The season was November, the hour midnight, the place a
slum in a Midland textile town.

Hanging from the wall of the house beyond was a dirty oil lamp round
which the fog circled in a hundred spectral shapes.  Seen by its light,
she was not pleasant to look upon.  Bare-armed, bare-headed, savage
chest half bare and sagging in festoons, she stood stayless and
unashamed, breathing gin and wickedness.  A grin of quiet joy was upon
her alcoholic countenance.  Nay, more than joy.  It was a light of
inward ecstasy, and sprang from the fact that a heavy carter's whip was
in her hand.

Not many feet from the spot on which she stood was the wall of a
neighbor's house.  Crouching against it so that he was scarcely visible
in the darkness was a boy of thirteen.  Without stockings or shoes, he
wore only a filthy shirt, a thing that had once been a jacket, and a
tattered lower garment which left his thighs half naked.

His face was transfigured with terror.

"Enery Arper," said the woman with a shrill snigger not unlike the
whinny of a horse, "Auntie said she'd wait up for you, didn't she?  And
she always keeps a promise, don't she, my boy?"

The figure six yards away the fog was doing its best to hide cowered
yet closer to the wall.

"And what was it, Enery, that Auntie promised you if you come 'ome
again with ninepence?"  The wheeze of the voice had a note of humor.

The boy was wedged so close to the wall that he had barked the skin off
his bare knees.  The woman, watching him intently, began to trail the
heavy lash on the cobbled yard.

"Said she'd make it up to a shillin' for you, didn't she? ... if you
come 'ome again with ninepence.  Said she'd cut the heart out o' you
... same as if it was the eye of a pertater."

A powerful arm was already loose.  The eye of an expert had the
distance measured to a nicety.

"Clean out."

A scream followed that was not human.  The heavy whip had caught the
boy round the unprotected thighs.

"I'll do ye in this time."

Mad with pain and terror the boy dashed straight at her, charging like
a desperate animal, as with leisurely ferocity she prepared for a
second cut at him.  The impact of his body was so unexpected that it
nearly knocked her down.

It was his only chance.  Before she could recover her balance he was
out of the gate and away in the fog.  A lane ran past the yard.  He was
in it before the whip could reach him again; in it and running for his
life.

The lane was short, straight and very narrow, with high walls on both
sides.  A turn to the right led through a small entry into a by-street
which gave access to one of the main thoroughfares of the city.  A turn
to the left ended in a blank wall which formed a blind alley.

By the time the boy was halfway down the lane, he realized that in his
mad terror he had turned to the left instead of to the right.  There
was no escape.  He was in a trap.

A moment he hesitated, sick with fear.  He could hear the heavy
footfalls of his pursuer; as she plowed through the fog he could hear
her wheezy grunts and alcoholic curses.

"Took the wrong turnin', eh?"  She was within ten yards.  "Hold on a
minute, that's all, young man!"

In sheer desperation the boy ran on again, well knowing he could not
get beyond the wall at the bottom of the lane.  He could see it
already.  A lamp was there, faintly revealing its grim outline with fog
around it.

"I'll do ye in, by God, I will!"

The voice was so near that his knees began to fail.  Overcome with
terror he threw himself on the ground near the wall.  He had neither
the strength nor the courage to try again the trick that had saved him
a minute ago.

He knew she was standing under the lamp, he knew she was looking for
him.

"Ah, Enery, I see yer," she said, with a savage laugh.

Content to know there was no escape for him she paused to get her
breath.

The boy began to wriggle along under the lea of the wall, while she
stood watching him.  The wall was old, and all at once he made a
discovery.  Close to his head was a small hole, where three or four
bricks had fallen out.  It was a mere black space, leading he knew not
where.  But he didn't hesitate.  Hardly knowing what he did, he
squeezed his head through the hole.  And then with the frenzied
desperation of a rat in a trap he dragged his body after it.

An oath came from the woman under the lamp, a short ten yards off.  She
sprang at the wall.  She lashed at it again and again, cursing
horribly.  But it was no use.  Her prey had escaped with one savage cut
across the heels.  She continued to lash at the hole, but the boy was
out of her reach.




II

Where was he?  He didn't know.  Half dead with fear he could hear her
lashing at the wall, but she wouldn't be able to get at him.

With a great effort he rose from his hands and knees.  He had hardly
strength to stand up.  He seemed to be in a sort of garden.  There was
mold under his feet.  It was too dark to see it, but he knew by the
smell; also it was damp and sticky.  He moved a few yards and his feet
became entangled among roots and bushes.  And then suddenly a dog began
to bark and his heart stood still.

For quite a minute he dared not move another step.  The dog sounded
very near, yet he could not return by the way he had come.  No, in
spite of the dog he must find another outlet from this garden.  Very
cautiously he moved a yard or two, and then stopped to listen.  Shaking
with terror he then moved on again.

Groping about in the fog and darkness, his teeth chattering with cold,
his brain quite numb, it seemed that he would never be able to find a
way out.  Where was he?  He had no idea of anything except the ground
under his feet.  Now it was a stretch of gravel, now a rubbish heap,
now moist earth, now roots and bushes, and then finally, after the
lapse of hours as it seemed, he came up against a wall.

It might be the wall through which he had crept.  Of that he could not
be sure, but yet he did not think it was.  He began to follow the line
of it, taking care to do so in the opposite direction to the dog whose
barking was incessant.  As he walked he rubbed his hands along the
surface of the wall in the hope of finding a gate.

For a long time he groped through the darkness, but came upon nothing
in the least resembling a gate.  Again he grew desperate.  He would
have to wait there until daylight.  But he simply dared not do that
with the dog straining at his chain, seemingly, only a very few yards
off.

Sick with cold and shaking in every limb he began to cry feebly.  His
knees were knocking, he was at the end of his wits.  There was no way
out of the garden, yet if he stayed in it the dog would kill him.
Suddenly he decided upon the only possible course; he must climb the
wall.  Not knowing its height, or what there was beyond, or whether it
was merely the wall of a house, he began to "shin" up it for all he was
worth, grasping its rough surface as well as he could with his hands
and his knees and his bare toes.  There must be some kind of a top to
it, and when the dog broke his chain, as every moment he threatened to
do, he might not be able to reach him.

Wild and precarious struggling, in the course of which he was several
times within an ace of toppling backwards into the garden, brought his
numb fingers at last to a kind of coping.  He had just strength enough
to draw up his body on to the narrow ledge, only to find that he could
not possibly remain on it.  The top of the wall was sown thickly with
broken glass.

He knew his hands and knees were cut, yet he could hardly feel
anything.  There was only one thing to do now; he must jump for it--one
side or the other.  He came to no deliberate decision; at that moment
he was completely unbalanced in body and mind, but a voice inside him
said suddenly:

"Chance it!"

Hands and knees instinctively gripping as hard as they could, he
slipped over the other side.  But it was impossible to keep a hold.  He
slipped and swayed and slipped again, and then he knew that he was
falling ... falling ... falling through space into the unknown.




III

Something hit him, something so hard that it seemed to crack him as if
he had been an egg.  It was the earth.  He lay a moment almost without
sensation, and then he realized that the dog was no longer barking.
Feeling reassured he made an effort to rise.  He couldn't move.  The
sensation was horrible.  Perhaps he had broken his back.

He tried several times, and because he could feel no pain the thought
seemed to grow upon him.  Presently, however, he found he could stand.
Still dazed and shaken in every bone, he knew now that he had had the
luck to fall upon soft earth.  But as soon as he stood up there came a
savage grinding pain in his left leg, and he lay down whimpering
feebly.  He then got up again, and then lay down again, and then
suddenly he wished he was dead.

If only he had had the luck to kill himself!  But every moment now made
the wish seem more vain.  He was conscious of one ache after another,
in every part of his body; his hands and feet were bleeding, he was
sick and sorry, but he seemed to know that death was a long way off.
Suddenly he stood up again.  The cold, wet earth under him was
unendurable.  Where was he?  He set his teeth, and began to drag his
left leg after him in order to find out.  Where was he?  This place
seemed a sort of garden too.  But there was no dog in it.  The damp
soil was merged very soon in substances less gentle to the feet; old
crocks and scraps of metal and other debris, the prelude to a rubbish
heap.  And then without in the least expecting it, he came upon water.
The question was answered.  He was on the bank of the canal.

The knowledge chilled right through him.  Here and now was his chance.
It wouldn't take more than a minute if he jumped straight in.  But the
water looked still and cold and horrible.  As he came to the edge he
found he couldn't face it.  He simply hadn't the pluck.

He limped on a few yards.  It might seem easier a bit lower down.  But
when he came a bit lower down he couldn't face it either, and he stood
at the edge of the water crying miserably.

After a while he dragged himself away from the canal.  He stumbled over
rubbish heaps and stones and brickbats, varied now and then with
nettles and twitch grass.  He came to a low bridge and crossed it.
Nothing would have been easier than to slip over the side; it might
have been there for the purpose; but this was one of the places where
the fog had lifted a little, again he caught a glimpse of the water and
again he moved on.

At last he came to some wooden railings and got through a gap where one
or two had been broken.  Here the fog was so thick that he lost his
bearings altogether.  He didn't know in the least where he was, he
couldn't see his hand before him; and then he stumbled over something
which jarred his hurt foot horribly.  The something was a wire.

Of course, it was the railway.  He remembered, almost with a feeling of
excitement, that the railway was in the next field to the canal.  A
moment he stood trying to make out things and noises in the fog.  Yes,
he could hear, at least he thought he could hear, wagons being shunted
in the sidings.  After he had moved a few yards towards the sound, he
was able to make out a red light in the distance.

For some odd reason which he couldn't explain, the feeling of
excitement began to grow with the certainty that he was on the line.
He could feel the metals, icy cold, smooth and slippery under his feet.
He limped along until a dim shape loomed ahead.  It was a signal box.
By this time his excitement was almost terrible.

He stood a moment listening to the snortings of an engine which he
couldn't see, and the clang-clang-clang of the wagons as they were
being shunted in the sidings.  And then all at once the signal under
which he was shivering dropped with a great clatter, and something very
deep down in him, a something he had not known existed until that
moment, gave a sort of little exultant cry and told him that now was
his chance.

Excited almost to the verge of joy he limped past the signal box in
order to get away from its lights.  If the thing was done at all it
would have to be done in darkness.  Presently he looked round, and with
a sensation of downright terror, found that the lights of the signal
box were no longer to be seen.  Here the fog was quite thick again;
whichever way he looked there was not a single object he could make out
in the darkness.  But under his bare feet he could feel the broad
metals icy, smooth, inexorable.

"Now's your chance," said a gentle voice deep down in himself.

Instantly he lay full length in the six-foot way.

"Set your head on the line," said the voice.

He did as he was told.  The sensation of the icy metal under his right
ear was so horrible that his heart almost stopped inside him.

"Close your eyes," said the voice, and then it said a little more
gently as if it knew that already he was half dead with fear, "Stay
just as you are and you'll not know nothink about it."

He closed his eyes.

"Don't move," said the voice.  "Stay there and it'll not hurt you."

If he had had a God to pray to, he would have prayed.

The engine seemed a long time on the way.  He daren't move hand or
foot, he daren't stir a muscle of his body.  But as the seconds passed
an intense desire came upon him to change the position of his head.  It
felt so undefended sideways on.  Surely it would be better if he turned
it round so that....

"Don't move," the voice commanded him.  "Keep just like that.  Quite
still."

He was bound to obey.  The voice was stronger than he.

"Eyes shut, and you'll not know nothink."

It was as a mother would have spoken had he ever heard a mother speak.

... The engine was coming.  He could hear it snorting and rattling in
the distance.  He simply daren't listen.  He tried to imagine he was
already dead.  But a frightful crash suddenly broke in upon his brain,
and then another, and then another ... he had never realized how much
it took to...

"Fog signals," said the voice.  "Keep just as you are ...  eyes shut
... quite still ... quite still."

There it was, grunting and rattling....  Know nothink!  ... there ...
now...

Grunting, rattling, snorting, what a time it took!  In spite of himself
he opened his eyes, and found that he was still alive.

"You were on the wrong line after all."

The sound of the voice turned him faint.




IV

There was only one thing to be done now, and this he did without delay.
He took his head from the metals and stood up as well as he could.  His
body was all numb and lifeless, but there was a queer excitement in him
somewhere that for the moment made him feel almost happy.  After all,
he wasn't dead.  And in that strange moment that was like a dream he
was almost glad he wasn't.  Yes, almost glad.  It was hard to believe
that he should wish to find himself alive, and yet as he stretched his
limbs and began to move he couldn't honestly say that after all he
wasn't just a little bit pleased.

He was not able to move very fast; he was so dreadfully cold for one
thing, and then his left foot was hurt.  But now, as he walked along
the six-foot way, he felt somehow stronger than he had ever felt in his
life before.  Of a sudden he crossed the metals and plunged recklessly
sideways into the fog.  He stumbled over some signal wires and fell on
his knees, got up and stumbled over some more.  What did it matter?
What did anything matter?  After all, it was quite easy to die.  He
must find the right line and make a job of it.

He stopped a moment, and turned this thought over in his mind.  And
then he heard the voice again.

"_Henry Harper, you'll never be able to do that again as long as you
live._"

The words were gentle and composed, but they struck him like a curse.
He knew that they were true.  Not as long as he lived would he be able
to do again as he had just done.  It was as if the judge in his wig
whom he had seen that afternoon riding to the Assizes in his gilt
carriage had passed a life sentence upon him.  His knees began to
crumble under him again; he could have shrieked with terror.  Crying
miserably he limped along into the sidings.  He came to a lamp.  All
around were silent, grim shapes upon which its feeble light was cast.
They were loaded wagons, sheeted with tarpaulins.  With the amazing
recklessness that had just been born in him he determined to find a way
into one of them in the hope of being able to lie down and sleep.  It
was not very difficult to climb up and get under one of the sheets,
which happened to have been loosely tied.  Also he had the luck to find
a bed that would have been more or less comfortable had the night not
been so bitterly cold.  The wagon was loaded with sacks full of a
substance soft and yielding; as a matter of fact, it was flour.

Henry Harper lay down with a feeling of relief and burrowed among the
sacks as far as he could get.  A mass of aches in body and soul,
anything was better than the darkness and damp fog and icy substances
cutting into his bare feet.  Presently, with the sacks piled all round
him, he felt less miserable, and he fell asleep.

How long he slept he didn't know.  But it must have been some little
time, and the sleep must have been fairly sound, for he was only
awakened by a great jolt of the wagon.  And before he was fully awake
it had begun to move.

Hadn't he better jump out?  No, let it move.  Let it do anything it
liked.  Let it go anywhere it pleased.  What did it matter?  Again he
fell asleep.

The next time he awoke he was shivering with cold and feeling very
hungry.  But the wagon was moving now and no mistake.  It was still
pitch dark, although the fog seemed to have lifted a bit, but the
detonators which had been placed on the line were going off now and
again with tremendous reports, signals flew past, and while he lay
wondering what he ought to do now, he passed through an array of lights
which looked like a station.

He soon came to the conclusion that it was useless to do anything.  He
couldn't get out of the wagon now even if he wanted to, that was unless
he wanted to kill himself.  Yes ... that was exactly what...

"Lie quiet.  Go to sleep," a stern voice commanded him.

He tried to sleep again but soon found he couldn't.  He was cold and
ill, but after an attack of vomiting he felt better.  Meanwhile the
wagon rattled on and on through the night, and it seemed to go faster
the farther it went.

Where was it going?  What did it matter where it went so long as he
went with it?  But--the sudden thought was like a blow--that was just
what did matter!  They would find him lying there, and they would give
him to the police, and the police would do something to him.  He knew
all about that, because they had done something to him once already for
taking an apple off a stall in the market place.  He had only taken
one, but they had given him six strokes, and in spite of the cold and
the pain in his left leg he still remembered just what they were like.

Perhaps he ought to jump for it.  No, that was impossible with his leg
like that; the wagon was going too fast.  He had better lie quiet and
slip out as soon as the wagon stopped at a station.  He burrowed far
down into the sacks once more, for the sake of the warmth, and after a
while he went to sleep again.

And then he had a dream that filled him with terror.  The police had
found him.  The police had found him in the wagon.

He awoke with a start.  Rough hands were shaking him.  Yes, it was
perfectly true!

"Kim up ... you!"

It was the voice of the police.

He turned over with a whimper and lifted up his head, only to drop it
instantly.  He had been blinded by the glare of a lantern held six
inches from his eyes.

"Well, damn me," a great, roaring voice surged into his ears.  "Here,
Ike!"

"What's up now?" said a second voice, roaring like the first.

"Come and look at this."

The boy dug his head into the sacks.

"What's up?" said voice the second.

"What about it?  Must ha' got in at Blackhampton."

"Well, damn me."

The boy burrowed deeper and deeper into the sacks.

"Here, come out of it."  The owner of the first voice took him by the
ear and dragged him out of the wagon.

"What's yer name?"

No answer.

His captor shook him roughly.

"Enry Arper," whimpered the boy.

"Enry what?"

"Enry Arper."

"Enry Arper, is it?  Well, you are going to have something to 'arp for,
you are, my lad."

"Ever had the birch rod, Mister Enry Arper?" inquired the first voice
with a kind of grim pleasantness.

The boy didn't answer.

"No?  Not had that pleasure?  The police are going to cut the skin off
o' you and sarve you right.  They'll larn you to trespass on to the
railway.  Fetch the foreman, Ike."

While the boy, securely held by the ear, stood shivering, Ike went
leisurely in search of the foreman shunter.  It was six o'clock, and
that individual, who had been on duty since that hour the previous
evening, was on the point of going home.  Ike found him in the
messroom, where he had gone to exchange his lantern for the small
wicker basket in which he brought his meals.  His name was Job Lorimer,
and being large and fat and florid he sauntered up to the scene of
action with an air of frank acceptance of life as it is, that seems to
go as a rule with his type of physique and countenance.

"Why, blow me, Iggins, what's all this year?"

"Allow me to introjuice Mr. Enry Arper o' Blackhampton.--Mr. Job
Lorimer, foreman shunter, Kentish Town."

"'Owdy do, young man.  Pleased to meet you."  Mr. Lorimer winked
solemnly at both his subordinates.  "What can we do for you?"

"Twelve strokes with the birch rod," said subordinate the first.

"Eight for the first offence," said subordinate the second.

Suddenly the boy fell down senseless at the foreman shunter's feet.




V

"Well, blow me," said the Foreman Shunter.  "Show the light, Pearson."

The second subordinate maneuvered the lantern.  "On'y a kid.  And I
never see sich a state as he's in.  No boots.  No stockings.  Just look
at them feet.  And his hands all of a mush.  Gawd!" said the Foreman
Shunter.

"What'll you do about it, Job?" said subordinate number one.

"Do about it?" said the Foreman Shunter sharply.  "Do about what?"

"Might let him go this time?" said subordinate number two.

The boy opened his eyes.

"I'll take him 'ome to the missus and give him some breakfast," said
the Foreman Shunter with an air of asperity.

The odd thing was that both subordinates seemed silently to approve
this grave dereliction of a foreman shunter's duty.

"Can you walk, me lad?"

"O' course he can't, Iggins, not with them," said the Foreman Shunter.
"Can't stand on 'em, let alone walk on 'em.  Here, catch holt o' the
bawsket."

The Foreman Shunter took the boy in his arms and carried him away from
the goods yard as he would have carried a baby.

"Leave the bawsket at No. 12 when you come off duty," he called back to
the first subordinate.

"Right, Job, I will," said the first subordinate rather respectfully,
and then as the Foreman Shunter passed out of hearing, the first
subordinate said to his mate, "Fancy taking a thing like that 'ome to
your missus."

In the meantime the boy was shivering and whimpering in what he felt to
be the strong arms of the police.

"Let me go, mister, this once," he whined as awful recollections surged
upon him.  He had been getting terribly hurt all through the night, but
he knew that he was going to be hurt still more now that the police had
got hold of him.

But his faint whimpers and half-hearted wriggles were without effect
upon the majesty of the law.

"Lie still.  Keep quiet," growled the Foreman Shunter, adding as quite
an impersonal afterthought, "Blast you!"

It seemed a very long time to the boy before he came to prison.  Up one
strange street and down another he was carried.  As he lay in the arms
of the police he could make out lamp after lamp and row after row of
houses in the darkness.

It was a long way to the station.

"Let me go this once, mister," he began to whine again.  "I'll not do
it no more."

"Quiet, blast you," growled the large, rich voice of the police.

At last they came to a door, which in the uncertain light seemed
exactly similar to one he had passed through on an occasion he would
never forget to his dying day.  He began to cry again miserably.
Perhaps they would give him something to eat--they did so before--but
he would not be able to eat anything this time if they offered it, not
until they had done what they had to do.

He could hear sounds a little way off ... inside the prison.  He
gripped convulsively the rough overcoat of his captor.  How vividly he
remembered it all!  They gave it two other boys first.  Again he could
hear their screams, again he could see the blood running down their
bare legs.

He must try to be a man ... he remembered that one of the other boys
had laughed about it afterwards ... he must try to be a man ... at
least that had been the advice of a fatherly policeman in spectacles
who had presided over the ceremony....

"Mother ... that you..."  The terrific voice of his captor went right
through him.  "Where are you, Mother?  Show a light."

Suddenly a door at the end of the passage was flung open.  There came a
blinding gush of gaslight.

"Why, Job ... whatever...!"

"I'll set him on the sophy."

"Yes, on the sophy.  Goodness gracious me!"

The boy realized that he was on a horsehair sofa, and that a fine,
clean, handsome-looking lady was standing with her mouth open in front
of him.

"Goodness gracious, Job!"

"Come all the way from Blackhampton in a truck this morning.  By the
5:40 Express."

"Well, I'm blessed if I ever see such a hobject.  I'll give him some
tea and a bit o' bacon, and some bread and butter, and then I'll get
some o' that mud off him."

"Some of it's blood," said the Foreman Shunter.

"Yes, I see it is.  Never ... did ... I ... see ... anythink ... like
him.  I'll make the tea; the kettle's boiling."  The voice of Mother
was the nearest thing to music the boy had ever heard.  It was better
even than that of the ladies who sang in the bar of the Wheat Sheaf,
the Red Lion, and the Crown and Anchor, outside which places he had
always stayed to listen when he could conveniently do so.  This room
was not in the least like the police station.  And he was quite sure
that the lady called Mother had nothing whatever to do with....

"Set him a bit nearer to the fire, Job,"--yes, the voice was
music--"and put this round him."

"This" was an old coat.




VI

"I'll give it him in a saucer," said Mother.  "It'll be cooler that
way."

A saucer of tea was offered to the boy.

"Can you hold it, me lad?"

"Yes, lady," he said, faintly.

"Lap it up, then.  Better let me try it first."  She sipped a little
out of the saucer.  "Yes, that's right enough."

The tea was so perfectly delicious that he swallowed it at a gulp.
Mother and the Foreman Shunter watched him with surprise.

"Now for a bite o' bread and butter," said Mother, sawing away at a
quartern loaf.

The boy seized the bread and butter like a hungry dog.  Mother and the
Foreman Shunter stood looking at him with queer, rather startled faces.

"I never see the likes o' that, Job."

"No, never," said the Foreman Shunter, solemnly.  "Damn me."

"What's your name, boy?"

"Enry Arper, lady."

"Enry what?"

"Enry Arper, lady."

"Could you eat a bit o' bacon, do you think?"

The boy nodded with an eagerness that made the Foreman Shunter laugh.

"I see nothing to laugh at, Job Lorimer," said his wife sharply.  Tears
had come into her eyes.  She whisked them away with a corner of her
apron, and then gave a sniff of remarkable violence.  "And they call
this a Christian land."

"You never heard me call it that, Mother," said the Foreman Shunter.

"More shame to you, then, Job Lorimer."

"I know this," said the Foreman Shunter, speaking in a slow and
decisive manner, "whatever this country is or whatever it ain't,
there's as much Christianity in it as there is in that hearthrug.  And
there ain't a bit more."

"Shut your head," said his wife.  "And hand me that knife and I'll cut
up this bit o' bacon for him."

She took a delicately browned rasher out of a hissing, delicious
smelling frying-pan on the fire, cut it into very small pieces, gave it
to the boy, and told him to eat it slowly.

After the boy's wants had been attended to, Mother spread a newspaper
on the sofa and told him to put up his legs and rest a bit.  The
Foreman Shunter then passed through a door and performed wonders in the
way of blowing and splashing at the scullery sink.  When he reappeared
his face was very red and shining and the boy was fast asleep.

"I'm thinking I'll have a bite meself," said Job, with a glance at the
sofa.  "And then I suppose I had better take him along to the police
station."

Mother made no reply, but gave her husband a breakfast worthy of a
foreman shunter.  She then examined carefully the boy's hands and feet.

"I never did see such a hobject," said she.  And then with an imperious
air, "I'll give him a wash, that's what I'll do."

In order to carry out this resolve, she went into the scullery, filled
the copper, and lit the fire.

Presently the members of the family, three small boys and a smaller
girl, came down to breakfast _en route_ to school.  They looked
wonderingly at the creature on the sofa, with great curiosity in their
half frightened eyes.  Their father told them sternly to keep away from
it, to get on with their breakfasts, not to make a noise, and to clear
off to school.

"Is it a boy or a girl?" Alfie asked Johnnie, in a thrilling whisper as
soon as father had retired to help Mother in the scullery.

"A girl, o' course."

There was some excuse for Johnnie: there was something that looked
exactly like a girl in the sleeping face.  The rest was hidden by the
coat.

The family was soon packed off to school, Johnnie "with a flea in his
ear" for having cleaned his boots imperfectly the night before.  Mother
then cleared away the remains of breakfast, and the Foreman Shunter
fetched a fair-sized zinc bath out of the washhouse, pushed back the
table, and set it down before the fire.  He filled it with warm water
from the copper, and then gave the sleeper a shake and said,

"Now, then, boy."

The boy roused himself with a little whimper of protest.  He had not
been very fast asleep; the police in varying forms of their activity
were still hovering round the outskirts of his mind.  He began to cry
miserably at the sight of the zinc bath, which supplied a forgotten
link in an awful chain of memories.  Yes, this was the police station
after all.  He remembered now quite well how they gave him a bath
before they ...

"What are you crying for?" asked Mother.  "I'm not going to hurt you,
my boy.  Nice warm bath.  Bind up your feet.  Then you can go to sleep
again."

Perhaps it wasn't the police station, after all.  Certainly that
institution as he knew it had no Mother and no warm tea and no fried
bacon, and no sofa and no old coat.

Mother removed the filthy shirt and the tattered knickerbockers with
uncompromising but not indelicate hands.

"Them had better be burnt, Job," she said sharply, as she gave them to
the Foreman Shunter to throw into the back yard.

"Better ha' done this job in the scullery, Mother," said he.

"Too cold...."  She took the temperature of the bath with an expert's
finger....  "I never did see anything like this poor child.  There's
nothing to him.  Look at his ribs.  You can count 'em.  Ugh!"  The eye
of Mother had been arrested by a broad red mark across both thighs.

"That's been done with a whip," said the Foreman Shunter, grimly.

"Just look at those feet ... they are beginning to bleed again.  And
these pore hands.  I'll get some rags and some Friar's Balsam.  And his
hair!  Goodness gracious me!  I'll have to go to the chemist's for
that, I'm thinking."

It was perfectly true that Mother had to pay a visit to the chemist for
the boy's hair.  Nothing less than the chemist could meet the case.

In the meantime, the Foreman Shunter soaped and washed the boy
thoroughly, dried him with a coarse towel, rubbed the Friar's Balsam on
the mutilated hands and feet, which made them smart horribly, and bound
them in clean rags.  Mother then returned to perform wonders with the
chemist's lotion.  Afterwards she fetched a nightgown of Alfie's, put
it on the boy, wrapped him up in a couple of blankets, and made him
comfortable on the sofa, and the Foreman Shunter drew it a bit nearer
the fire.  Then the boy was told he could sleep as long as he liked.
Presently he began to doze, his mind still running on the police; but
certainly this was not a bit like the station.
